# 5 simple rules for a programmer team lead.

_Captured: 2016-03-23 at 22:53 from [medium.com](https://medium.com/@Stromberg/5-tips-for-team-leading-developers-team-eb135d5784d2)_

_Over the years of dynamic and active work on the team-lead position I have read dozens of books, heard hundreds of useful(and what not) tips and seen about thousand posts on social networks, that (perhaps) could help my self-development. I realized that I've got something now that I want to share. Certainly, every work process is unique, and it doesn't matter what piece of advice you were given -- you have to come up with your own rules._

_Having analyzed my experience, I can highlight 5 rules that help me manage my team._

  1. **_Everybody is your friend_  
**A lot of team-build coaches suggest to keep strictly a business relationship with your teammates, and not get into their personal life. I think this piece of advice is terrible. Your teammates aren't machines -- when something goes wrong with their kids, when they argue with their partners, even simple quarrel with a passer-by on the street can influence their effectiveness -- good team-lead has to bond with his teammates and really "feel" them. There is no need to snoop around their personal life, but be open and ready to talk -- these simple things will help you establish that bond. Thus, your teammates will come to you and tell you what happened on their own, and even ask for a piece of advice. Coming to work where everybody is your friend is way easier and fun than coming to a "factory". You'll be on top of things and be able to make adjustments when they're needed.
  2. **_You know "WHAT" better than others, but not "HOW".  
_**Programming -- is a very creative process (even though it doesn't seem as such). Always encourage self-seeking for a solution of an assigned task, but stay in control -- the complexity of the solution depends on the developer, and not on the actual task. Ask a developer about how he or she is going to deploy the task, offer your own solutions, while listening to all solutions that your teammate suggests. Guide the development process on its first stages. Offer not the way, but the ultimate result you want to achieve. Give developer a chance to show his or her potential. Experience and creative thinking will make your employee a great professional on the long run.
  3. **_Motivate not to work hard, but to become better.  
_**Explain it to your teammates that job is a way of becoming a better and more experienced specialist. Professionalism doesn't have any limits, but there is a limit of a task difficulty. At some point, your team will get really experienced and most of the tasks will become really easy and boring for them. Every new task is a small goal that has to be achieved and skills that allow deploying a task define a real specialist. A team of specialists is an invaluable team. Explain your teammates that tasks can be monotonous, but learn how to deploy such tasks in a short term. When quality of work is obvious -- start working on speed!
  4. **_Demand the effectiveness and not the amount of work.  
_**You don't need a slow and weak teammate because of the overtimes he or she works. Such employee can decrease the level of motivation for the entire team. Every task can be solved in numerous ways, and your task as a team lead is to distribute the work load among the team is such a way that they complete their tasks as soon as possible; moreover, it will be great if developers like their tasks and are not bored by doing them. I created a system when an experienced employee, while working on his or her task, decides where he or she needs help and gives the task to a less experienced employee explaining what to do. Firstly, you don't have to do the whole task yourself; secondly, a trainee gets more experienced.
  5. **_Earn trust and be fair.  
_All previous rules of team management don't work if your teammates don't respect you. Leader isn't a teamster with a whip, he is like all other team members, a person who sets the vibe.  
**When asking for something from your teammate, think about how you would feel about this task, and think how to make this task more interesting for the employee. Try to always be aware of how you personally are -- you may be in a bad mood and it might seem that the entire team works badly -- this isn't the reason to scold anybody. And one more thing -- always keep in mind that you work for the developer, and not the other way around. Make developers' work easier, more interesting and more effective! When I came up with this rule and implemented it, the work process became more structured and my teammates became much happier working.
