# 5 Ways Machine Learning Has Influenced The Modern Cloud

_Captured: 2017-04-03 at 17:13 from [www.forbes.com](https://www.forbes.com/sites/janakirammsv/2017/04/03/5-ways-machine-learning-has-influenced-the-modern-cloud/#ade7411113a7)_

  


With mobile apps getting stagnated, businesses are turning to interactive bots to drive customer service and support. Bots are quickly replacing apps by providing conversational experience to consumers. With platforms like WeChat, WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger, and Slack gaining traction, the demand for embedding bots is increasing. Though the concept of Bots existed since the initial days of Yahoo! Chat, the application of Machine Learning is making them useful. Developers can now train Bots based on the past conversational patterns. Apart from responding to standard queries, Bots can drive meaningful discussions with consumers.

Platforms like API.ai, IBM Watson Botkit, and Microsoft Azure Bots as a Service are examples of this emerging platform.

Though IoT existed for over two decades in different forms, it is the data-driven cloud platforms that are redefining this trend. Apart from capturing a massive amount of data from various sensors to query, process and analyze significant trends, Machine Learning can make IoT more intelligent. Predictive maintenance is a compelling use case for industrial IoT in which the platform will be able to detect faults or malfunctioning of devices much before they are noticed by users. Multiple Machine Learning algorithms work in tandem to evolve the right model that is best aligned in understanding the pattern of datasets generated by devices. These models can proactively find anomalies which may eventually result in the breakdown of the equipment or devices. This capability takes industrial IoT to the next level.

Microsoft Azure IoT Suite and IBM Watson IoT are examples of predictive maintenance solutions for IoT.

The rise of Machine Learning is turning voice-based personal assistants more powerful than ever. These assistants have the ability to learn from your past choices and usage trends, which help them in offering a customized experience. For example, given the time of day, they will be able to create a playlist that best suits your mood dynamically. They will become smarter in the way you see the notifications and reminders. The APIs exposed by these assistants put the power of ML in the hands of developers. They can further customize the experiences delivered to consumers.

Amazon Alexa, Apple Siri, Google Assistant, and Microsoft Cortana are examples of intelligent personal assistants powered by Machine Learning.

  


The traditional data warehouse got disrupted by Big Data and Apache Hadoop. By bringing Machine Learning closer to enterprise data warehouse, decision makers will be able to get intelligent insights from existing data. They will be able to forecast the trends more accurately. Every domain including SCM, CRM, ERP, MRP, HR, Sales, and Finance will get benefitted from ML-driven insights.

Amazon, Google, IBM, and Microsoft are building the bridges between the traditional business intelligence platforms and the emerging ML-based tools. It is easy to integrate Amazon Kinesis Analytics with Amazon ML or Azure Stream Analytics with Azure ML Web Services. Google is making it easy to leverage Cloud ML from BigQuery and Cloud DataFlow. Developers and architects can easily connect the dots to build next generation business intelligence tools.

These are some of the examples that showcase how Machine Learning is becoming the focal point of the intelligent cloud. In the coming quarters, we will see additional services and use cases offered by cloud vendors.
