# The Elephant in the Room

_Captured: 2015-10-16 at 10:32 from [samanthabielefeld.com](http://samanthabielefeld.com/journal/the-elephant-in-the-room)_

Marco Arment released Overcast 2.0 last week, and rid the app of its $4.99 in-app purchase to enable Smart Speed and Voice Boost, making both features free for all to enjoy. Along with this change he also introduced a new business model moving forward he calls "patronage". This is an in-app purchase users of the app can elect to pay in order to support the continued development of the app, but it doesn't introduce any additional functionality (at least for now). His argument for this change stemmed from the fact that only one in every five users ever elected to put any money into his free to download podcast player, and that he was unhappy with seeing such a large number of people not enjoying the best Overcast has to offer. He took his original free entry into the podcast app market, itself already enticing to a large number of people, and has now further asserted his quest for dominance.

His stated goal is to improve the user experience for as many people as possible, but it comes as a hard blow to the other paid up-front apps he shares the category with. I mentioned in my [review](http://samanthabielefeld.com/overcast-2-0) of Overcast that I was happy to see an alternative method of generating revenue in the midst of a marketplace dominated by people unwilling to support software financially, and it led to many indie software developers reaching out to me. Those who emailed and DMed me wanted to inform me that while it will most likely end up being successful for Marco, that he is not your average developer. My stance has changed, because I have been further educated on the topic at hand.

Yesterday he published a piece to his site titled, '[Pragmatic app pricing](http://www.marco.org/2015/10/13/pragmatic-pricing)'. Upon reading it, I ran head first into a wall of outrage upon seeing this bullet point: "I'm not doing anything that other developers can't do." The idea that any app developer can witness Marco's attempt at a different business model, and employ the idea in their own app offering, is true. Anybody can try this model if they wish, the difference is that hardly any other developers will. We are all keenly aware of the publicity surrounding Marco, and the influence he has over the entire industry. From his ground floor involvement in Tumblr (for which he is now a millionaire), to the creation and sale of a wildly successful app called Instapaper, he has become a household name in technology minded circles. It is this extensive time spent in the spotlight, the huge following on Twitter, and dedicated listeners of his weekly aired Accidental Tech Podcast, that has granted him the freedom to break from seeking revenue in more traditional manners. The success I would see by releasing a music album stating, "pay what you feel my talent is worth", would pale in comparision to when Radiohead [does so](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/markets/2816893/Radiohead-challenges-labels-with-free-album.html).

In his piece he states:

> I don't know if Overcast stands a chance of preventing the Facebookization of podcasting, but I know I'm increasing the odds if my app is free without restrictions. As long as I can make money some other way, I'm fine.

What he is most certainly doing is increasing the odds that no other third party podcast app will feel viable in the market by charging up front for their offering. In an attempt at increasing market share for his app, he is helping to reaffirm the incorrect thinking that software should be free to the end user. We are already faced with an App Store ecosystem driven by free apps with either no business model, or are owned by large companies that don't depend on generating revenue from their placement in the store. As a new user, if I see that Overcast is both; completely free, and highly ranked with positive reviews...why would I chance paying $4.99 for Pocket Casts? If I don't require support for video podcasts, or have mixed iOS/Android device use, I can't imagine I would. Even people who are willing to pay five dollars for an app are suddenly up in arms when the developer(s) decide a major point update is worth charging for (Tweetbot 4, anyone?). The argument that paying for Tweetbot provides for a much more enjoyable Twitter experience over the free alternative holds a lot of ground for many people. There isn't much of a case to be made when comparing the completely free Overcast to paid apps in the same category.

As one developer put it to me, it seems a bit tone deaf for him to even be trying to relate himself to the other individuals trying to create a revenue stream on the App Store. The typical programmer doesn't have a popular website with ad placements, or a successful podcast that earns them tens, and tens of thousands of dollars a year. I'm not knocking his success, he has put effort into his line of work, and has built his own life. He can afford to gamble the potential for Overcast to provide him income. But it most certainly is not the norm. Few app developers are able to enjoy the launch day success that comes from having major sites like iMore, Macworld, MacStories, and 9to5Mac all launch reviews of their app in unison on the day of release. The result is a chart topping, traffic driving experience that results in even more downloads than the people who follow his work would provide.

The issue isn't that Marco is successful, there are many app developers who would love to be in the same position. He has earned his time in the spotlight, and it's only natural for him to take advantage of it. Though to state that anyone can simply do the same thing and be successful, is just plain wrong. He has accelerated the race to the bottom for the podcast app category, and he comes bearing a huge following of people who will give him money for nothing in return except for the possibility of further development of Overcast. The average developer isn't being called out by name by Phil Schiller for something negative they have written about Apple. The only thing "indie" about Marco is that he works by himself. He is far removed from the typical experience of app creators, and even if it's deserved, it wouldn't hurt for him to be a little more humble, and realistic.
