# Think creativity is important in mediation? Interested in the neuroscience of creativity? Then here's a resource for you

_Captured: 2017-02-21 at 16:52 from [westallen.typepad.com](http://westallen.typepad.com/brains_on_purpose/2013/11/think-creativity-is-important-in-mediation.html?utm_content=bufferef631&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer)_

You may access online the entire paper titled "[Applying the neuroscience of creativity to creativity training](http://www.frontiersin.org/Journal/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00656/full)" (_Frontiers in Human Neuroscience_); abstract below. I recommend reading it if you have an interest in the brain and creativity. The paper includes sections titled "Teaching the Neuroscience of Creativity" and "The Applied Neurocreativity Course"; the latter presents many details of the creativity course.

From that second section:

_All the theory is subsequently boiled down to a simplified and easily comprehensible model that we have labelled NeuroCreativity, consisting of five key concepts based on basic brain processes (priming, close and remote associations, inhibition, fixation and the release of inhibition--referred to as incubation) we see as being most important, in addition to well documented neurological processes needed to understand the neural processes of creative behavior. The main idea behind this approach is based on Mednick's (1962) theory that creative processes can be understood as the ability to rearrange knowledge that already exists in the mind, and thus the greater the number of associations (especially remote associations) an individual has to the requisite elements of a given problem, the greater the probability of reaching a creative solution. Our theoretical framework is therefore a merge between associative theories of creativity and basic neuroscientific knowledge of how the brain's associative networks function and their natural limitations (e.g., how the neurological principles of lateral inhibition can be used to understand cognitive fixation). ..._

If you are interest in more reading, resources are listed in [this description of the course Applied Neuro Creativity](http://kursuskatalog.cbs.dk/2013-2014/KAN-CMP_VANC.aspx).

Abstract of "Applying the neuroscience of creativity to creativity training":

_This article investigates how neuroscience in general, and neuroscience of creativity in particular, can be used in teaching "applied creativity" and the usefulness of this approach to creativity training. The article is based on empirical data and our experiences from the Applied NeuroCreativity (ANC) program, taught at business schools in Denmark and Canada. In line with previous studies of successful creativity training programs the ANC participants are first introduced to cognitive concepts of creativity, before applying these concepts to a relevant real world creative problem. The novelty in the ANC program is that the conceptualization of creativity is built on neuroscience, and a crucial aspect of the course is giving the students a thorough understanding of the neuroscience of creativity. Previous studies have reported that the conceptualization of creativity used in such training is of major importance for the success of the training, and we believe that the neuroscience of creativity offers a novel conceptualization for creativity training. Here we present pre/post-training tests showing that ANC students gained more fluency in divergent thinking (a traditional measure of trait creativity) than those in highly similar courses without the neuroscience component, suggesting that principles from neuroscience can contribute effectively to creativity training and produce measurable results on creativity tests. The evidence presented indicates that the inclusion of neuroscience principles in a creativity course can in 8 weeks increase divergent thinking skills with an individual relative average of 28.5%._
