# UI Design: What Is AMP (Accelerated Mobile Pages)?

_Captured: 2017-02-12 at 03:36 from [dzone.com](https://dzone.com/articles/ui-design-what-is-amp-accelerated-mobile-pages?edition=268938&utm_source=Daily%20Digest&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=dd%202017-02-11)_

### Google's AMP is a breakthrough for UI design. By augmenting pages to reduce throughput, mobile users can get an experience closer to that on their computers.

If you have ever used your Google App on your mobile phone, say the classic search engine, you would have seen that many page results show this tiny mark next to them that reads "AMP." Now, if you use your Google browser on your laptop or computer to search for the same web result, you don't see any such marking there. You see it only on your mobile devices. Now so, what is AMP? Let's have a look.

The Accelerated Mobile Pages (AMP) project is a rapidly trending open source initiative that basically helps publishers in creating and curating online content that can be easily optimized for mobile phone users. In layman terms, this technology helps optimize web content to mobile-phone centric levels and helps it load anywhere, notwithstanding the strength of the network signal that the said mobile phone is operating on. This has been one of the latest in the production line of revolutionary tech-based innovations that happens at Google on a regular basis. AMP has been, and continues to be, a systemic effort towards improving the mobile content ecosystem for all stakeholders, be it content creators, publishers, consumer platforms, or users. And this offering from Google has been quite a success story too. You may ask web publishers, the tech department of popular online newspapers, magazines, blogs, or even [talk to your favorite blogger](https://influence.co/category/blogger): You will receive a consensus that AMP has been such a life-saver for them, at least as far as their revenues are concerned. So, what is this all about? How did it come about to be? Let's understand.

Necessity is the mother of invention. This age-old maxim holds true even today, especially when it comes to the innovation of Accelerated Mobile Pages. It didn't take long before the Internet giant Google realized that the present and the future belongs to billions of customers using the Internet on their mobile devices rather than laptops or computers. This is because not only do mobile devices come at cheap rates across the market, but also because they serve as multipurpose platforms - easy to carry, with options for calling or chatting with friends, colleagues, and family on the go, and doubling as news and information outlets or as platforms for viewing mass media infotainment like movies, TV shows, sports, etc.

It was noticed by surveys that people who access large configuration web articles over their mobile devices generally tended to cancel the page even before it could load on their mobile Internet connections -- because of a paucity of time and patience. This is where the idea of AMP emerged. It was designed as a technology that could load a large configuration web article in an optimized, content-only form that would save time and precious mobile data as well, all to keep the users interested.

What was the catch in there for the company? This would, after all, lead to numerous more page views and ultimately, greater revenues for the publishers, as well as Google. So this is when engineers at Google brainstormed with lots of feedback from publishing and technological companies. They came up with the concept of Accelerated Mobile Pages, which, by their automated designs, would enable users to access a web page faster on their mobile devices at a fraction of the cost of the initial mobile data, especially in any area with poor Internet connectivity.

So, all in all, AMP is a tech innovation designed to tackle the slow loading of web pages on mobile devices functioning on poorer Internet networks. In a world where instantaneous speed is assumed to be ideal, in the original scenario, web pages that had a [bounce rate](https://dzone.com/articles/bounce-rate-and-seo) of more than 10 seconds had a major chance of getting bounced off, rather than loading completely. AMP is the solution to this problem. Not only does it save time for users expressing an interest in accessing a web page, it also actually ensures that the user can access the original content as well. Because of its proposed rapidness with bounce rates of, ideally, a few couple of seconds, AMP does ensure that web pages load completely on mobile devices, rather than bouncing off.

One more aspect of AMP is its design to tackle advertisement blocking software. As is well-known, web advertisements are great sources of revenue for online publishers, though a major irritant for users. The new AMP format has been designed in such a way that will discourage content users from installing ad blocking software, while at the same time being easy on the eye for the users, rather than acting as ad-heavy irritants. This has attracted some of the most popular and leading ad networks like Amazon, Google Ad sense, AOL AdTech, Taboola, etc. to adopt AMP's ad extended component.

From a business standpoint, AMP HTML is an efficient way of optimizing web pages so that user bounce rate can be reduced, making it an efficient strategy to get more customers and hence convert the technology into an avenue for more revenue. Publishers used to edit and remove content from the web pages so that they could reduce their bounce rate for mobile devices, thereby enabling more users to access pages on their mobile Internet. However, AMP HTML has arrived on the scene and removed that requirement. Now, online publishers can look to have the same content on their mobile pages that they have on their web pages, and AMP will take care to ensure that their content is crawled, indexed, displayed, and cached by third parties for complete and easy viewing for users operating on mobile devices with poorer Internet networks.
