# Thinking About New Ways to Educate Kids

_Captured: 2017-09-01 at 21:14 from [www.inorganicthoughts.com](https://www.inorganicthoughts.com/thinking-about-new-ways-to-educate-kids/?ref=quuu&utm_content=bufferb41f5&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer)_

For a while I've been thinking about what might really work in terms of preparing kids for a new and unpredictable world. A lot of people have. I wrote this a little while ago regarding the changes we as a world need to make, and when the time's right I'll be diving into this project myself. For now, would love your feedback on this post and enjoy!

On the face of it, most developed countries give most of their kids a solid education. This is however according to the standardized tests we give them, which demand fluency in recall and in thinking 'critically' about non-fundamental questions. Standardized tests, in other words, focus on producing people who see growth incrementally and not radically/exponentially. They learn to be bored by duty and not motivated by meaning. Standardized Tests and the other ways our traditional schooling system measures competency fail to teach people how to survive in the world of either today or tomorrow because they do not teach students to proactively reach and reinvent the fundamentals of a given challenge.

To keep test-taking as the foundational pillar of education, a school/society has to pre-establish philosophical frameworks for what and why a human being is, what learning is, what and why society is, and how best to go about creating these human beings and societies.

So that I don't go down the rabbit hole, I'm just going to say what the answers to each of these things are in the status quo:

- A human being is one of two things: a follower or a leader. A follower is someone who does what other people say and thinks what other people tell them to think. A leader is someone who tells other people what to do and what to think, but only within the confines of what other people have told him to value, think, and do, which is called tradition. This hierarchy is permanent and unchanging. The philosophical underpinning this human being lives by is, first and foremost, certainty and order: about the world, about who we are, about why we are. Nobody rocks the boat too hard and more or less everybody gets to grow incrementally. This is a reaction to the uncertainty and disorder that comes with living in nature, as we did for so long. (Note that even the most progressive schools still believe that everyone should be a 'leader.' This is terminology we will soon be modifying.)

- The why of a human being is to maintain a society (country, state, city, neighborhood, family) that is 'better' than everyone else's, but only incrementally so. This is for the protection of the organism that we call society. If there is too much growth in any one place, it's tumorous and needs to be excised. Competition between these societies (whether through war or other means) are fundamentally what drives growth; individual growth is subordinate to the growth of the particular society you are in. I'm aware that thinking of war as a means towards growth is quite strange and alien, but it remains true that this is how we've seen it.

- In order to make sure everyone understands this model, consciously and unconsciously, we have to show the follower/leader model at all times. Teachers at the podium therefore exercise ultimate authority over thought, learning, and behavior. Parents reinforce the teachers at home. Police reinforce teachers and parents on the streets. All kids, then, are born followers. They have no choice in the matter. "Guidance" is dangerous; "Unexpected Questions" are only acceptable in theory. What is really needed are expected questions and answers and commands, which reinforce that everyone is learning the certainty and order needed to keep us going (which is the point of society up to this point -- simply to survive).

It may seem as if I'm anti-status-quo by writing this, and of course I am on a personal level. But this model was necessary to get us through the misery of the industrial revolution. Since we're long out of that revolution, and in the middle of the information revolution, we need something different. This difference is grounded in these trends that represent the information revolution:

- All information we could ever want is currently at our fingertips. We don't need to regurgitate information.

- Things are changing so quickly that established ways of thinking, being, and doing are being uprooted all the time. Certainty and order have to take on a new form in the belief that progress comes in failing early and often, tinkering and experimentation, and radical rethinking. Pushing the bounds of what's possible, where we individually and communally see it as possible, is therefore the new premise, and "Ready Fire Aim" (look at the problem, try something, fix your methodology as you learn more about the challenge) is the new methodology.

- Nobody is a lone soul anymore. We are merging with technology so that our identities are becoming part of it, and its identity is becoming part of us. This leads us to the inevitable conclusion that interdependence is the only way of being. Communication and listening, therefore, are the two critical skills for this new world.

These three premises alone render standardized test-taking and lecturing defunct. Today and tomorrow will require radically deep critical thinking skills, communication and listening skills, empathy and cooperation, and a concession to the idea that we are all newbies at everything all the time. There are no more experts on anything in this new world we're entering. There are no leaders, only guides and visionaries, creators and doers. Multiple people or one person can manage these roles, and those roles can shift at any time to anyone. Further, because interdependence is now the only way of being, we are forced to admit that everyone of every age has a valuable and worthy experience to offer to everyone. I'm not regressing to platitudes; I mean literally that everyone can, should, and must offer their experiences, thoughts, feelings, concerns, questions, input, output to everyone. (Note how overwhelming that idea is, because the technological element that will help us work with this deluge of information will be relevant to this educational approach.) This still requires vision, direction, and guidance; teachers therefore are now understood to be people who guide students to fulfilling their individual potential within a group. And this is key: if you have lost sight of the cooperative element, you are six feet underground. There is no saving you in this new world, no matter how incredible your potential is or how hard you work.

Before I get into exactly how this learning will and should take place, and how I intend on executing this as a successful business model [[in progress]] and what the step-by-step vision is [[in progress]], I'd like to get into what's at stake at making this come about.

Today we are more globalized than we've ever been, and yet we are not experiencing the sense of social togetherness one should expect from our position. We're polarized and fragmented, angry and divisive, isolationist and exclusionary. We learn to be this way from the time we are children. It is not uncommon to hear from people that there are irreconcilable differences between them and the groups they particularly dislike. This should strike everyone as bizarre. So should the arguments that 'the internet caused this divisiveness by guiding people towards other people who agree with theirs.' The internet is an amoral device; its incentives fundamentally align with the users who use it. We have decided to use it to go towards views we like, instead of views and arguments we dislike. This is _a priori_ to the internet. It stems from the status-quo outlook of certainty and order, of finding stable footing in what we know instead of pushing the bounds into what we don't know.

We have not spent enough time imagining what will happen if we have a constructive outlook and approach actually grounded in the world of today and tomorrow, but the outlines of that future are definitely visible if we look closely enough. We are in the process of an incredible technological revolution whose first major milestone in the 21st century will be the production of a planetary-scale brain. (Kevin Kelly talks about this a bit in _[The Inevitable_ ](https://www.amazon.com/Inevitable-Understanding-Technological-Forces-Future-ebook/dp/B016JPTOUG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1502572550&sr=8-1&keywords=the+inevitable)which I highly recommended.) We and our devices are the individual neurons that are making this brain happen. Every time you look something up on the internet or use a hashtag (that is, tagging data with metadata), you are teaching this brain what is and isn't right, how it should and shouldn't see things. This brain's computing power is still doubling exponentially every 18 months and will continue to do so, and the implications of this cannot be understated. In order to make this brain 'healthy', and in order for us to live healthily within it, we need to cooperate and grow rather than compete. Elon Musk is [spending his time turning us into a multi planetary civilization](http://www.spacex.com/about); it is easy to imagine each planet itself becoming a neuron in a great galactic web of intelligence. My own thoughts on this are for another discussion, but it's an extravagant vision from which we all have the potential to benefit.

What fewer people are discussing with any foresight or depth are the socio-cultural implications of a population stuck in the incremental-mentality world using the web and its associated technology, AI. [Jobs are about to be replaced faster than many people can learn them](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/24/opinion/sunday/artificial-intelligence-economic-inequality.html). Twenty-and-thirty-year careers are over. This is because we believe there are still such things as 'jobs' and 'careers.' These are placeholder words for "exploiting opportunities that will be around for extended periods of time," which no longer exist, and which were foundational to [the middle-class mentality that is now disappearing.](http://money.cnn.com/2016/12/22/news/economy/us-inequality-worse/index.html) New technologies and ways of doing things are going to overwhelm and deprive us of purpose, strength, and growth if we only look at places where we can exploit new opportunities instead of creating new ones for ourselves and others with the help of those around us. This deprivation, if left unchecked, will lead to serious reactionary behavior that will make Nice and Orlando seem minor. Revolutions and killings will be more commonplace, and with the help of the internet, which can make every individual into a characterless number, give unwieldy power to one individual or one group, and impact everyone's finances, thoughts, and feelings, it is easy to imagine using the internet and globalization for destructive purposes. In fact we've expressed that schadenfreude endless times in apocalyptic films and stories. We take joy in that end, as said, because imagining the end of things gives us a sense of power globalization is depriving us of: the power of being a clear and distinct individual with a 'stable' and certain outlook and life path. _**Empowering people to see a different future for themselves and to enact that future, then, needs to be the basis for any 21st-century model of education.**_

So that's the why for revamping the way our children learn, or rather how 'we' teach 'them.' (They of course will teach us as much as we teach them in this new world.) Next is the how. First, the market for revolutionary schools begins in the US. Its cultural imperialism has spread the challenges of its old model to the rest of the world, so the antidote to those challenges will most likely originate here. The intention is to spread globally, quickly. (Because I haven't built a financial model, I can't yet say how quickly.) [The AltSchool ](https://www.altschool.com/)seems to be on a similar path, although they haven't made their long-term intentions clear yet.

Education in the United States is an especially difficult industry for 3 reasons:

1) Because the implications of many of the changes we implement can only be seen after a long time has passed. Forgive the truism, but this is because human learning happens at a human pace. The ingenuity lies in being able to experiment with the curriculum in such a way that the kids and teachers benefit from the experimenting. The entrepreneurial spirit has to penetrate into how everyone is learning to learn and learning to teach, otherwise the whole project falls apart.

2) Funding is hard to find. Few people can pay for a year of schooling, and these experimental schools would receive the most value-add in the poorer communities, which many of the elite, innovative schools can't access for lack of government or VC support.

3) The regulations on the books are damning. Only certain states are open to alternative education at all, though to varying degrees, and there are these federal standards showing painfully little faith in humanity that have to be overcome.

So we need something more than simply a great school or a forward-thinking philosophy. We need a movement, complete with lobbyists, social clout, and a comprehensive marketing strategy that involves teachers, administration, and students. And to be clear, the critical success of this movement relies entirely on changing the rules so that where there is demand for a certain type of alternative school, it will appear. (Imagine a school focused almost entirely on the arts, for example.) The goal is to make building schools and creating environments of learning as exciting as building startups in Silicon Valley. How do we go about making that happen? There are some incredible schools out there, one of the schools whose approach I respect being [The KoSchool. ](http://koschool.com)

But let's start with an outline of what I think might be a great school.

First, the school should give ample free time and privilege to its students to develop entrepreneurial endeavors outside of school, leveraging platforms like KhanAcademy to allow students to progress through math and other subjects at their own pace. In the KoSchool, they have a class called Socratics in which the students sit together and work through a difficult text for a designated period of time, similar to the college I graduated from, [St. John's College](http://sjc.edu). While students often break the text down sentence-by-sentence, working together to gain comprehension, they also move along tangents that are sometimes unhelpful, sometimes inspiring and thoughtful. This is in line with failing early and failing often, and learning to work within a group as part of something bigger. Classes such as coding and physics should be open to students, as should something physical and which promotes the overcoming of suffering such as martial arts, dancing, or parkour.

Teachers should be able to make spontaneous changes to the structure of classes based on student complaints and arguments, and together they can experiment on what works and what doesn't. Parents should be looped in weekly on their child's progress. The teacher, while performing a guiding role, should be taking copious notes on comments students make and assess their thinking, direction, and effort on a day-to-day, week-to-week, month-to-month, and year-to-year basis.

What I saw at the KoSchool validated many of these policies. I saw no bullying or negative judgment from anyone. Everyone dressed in ways that were respectful and authentic to themselves without badgering from the adults. They took turns speaking organically. Middle school students were not difficult, a particularly incredible shock to me. They all cleaned the school together at the end of the day. And the emotional openness of the school felt otherworldly: At the end of the school week, they spend 15 minutes in a "class" called AAA, or Apologies, Acknowledgements, Appreciations. Everyone gets into a big circle, takes three deep belly breaths, and whoever wants to apologize for anything they've done (or didn't do) to whomever can do so. Then they acknowledge each other -- all the good, interesting, and heart-warming comments they want to make to one another. And lastly they spend a minute thinking of someone that week they especially appreciated, and say their name out loud. This kind of positive energy is how we overcome divisiveness. It's how we create a sexy and exciting place to be. And it's how we give students the trust and faith that they need to go off on their own with others who share their dreams and achieve them.

There are four challenges to overcome in phase one of such a project, which I describe below:

1) Make an educational environment so sexy and exciting that the vast majority of kids will be thrilled to attend. This entails:

- Empirically validating iterations of the program using both traditional and non-traditional metrics.

- Continuing to tweak and experiment with the curriculum and structure.

- Developing a teacher training college to internally certify teachers, and making the process open source for others to build on.

- Marketing heavily to the public, developing a barebones lobbying presence, and finding a core all-star administrative and software engineering team.

- Succeeding at accreditation. (This is the most difficult question.)

In order to speed up growth for the students, teachers, and school(s), the notion of extended summer/winter vacations will eventually have to be abandoned. The world no longer stops in the summer, and neither should school/learning. It's how that formerly-labeled vacation time will be newly spent and managed that the new iteration of schooling will find its true ingenuity. This inevitably also means that the traditional grade structure of fourth, fifth, sixth grades etc. has to disappear and be replaced with a totally individualized sense of progress. Such a school can take in kids on a rolling basis, allowing unprecedentedly rapid scalability. This also means we get to rethink what vacations are: In the new world of schooling, kids will be able to take a number of vacation days that are individualized to them, and that are often filled with purpose and remain connected to their learning experience while in school. They can take those vacations at any time with parental permission. Sick days are the same way: No one should be penalized for being sick. Furthermore, the schools themselves should be no more than a hundred kids at the very largest, and twenty at the very smallest. Intimacy and personalization have to remain key throughout the process. If an average five-year-old can't remember everyone's name at the school by memory, it's too big. And lastly, there must be an on-staff therapist for the teachers. Like the students, the teachers must grow rapidly themselves. If anything, the teachers must be more capable of learning than the students they're teaching. Ensuring that there is a staff member dedicated to untying emotional Gordian Knots is what will keep schools running beautifully.

To the second phase of such a project:

2a) Expand to two more small schools and experiment with how they interact with one another. Several rounds of funding commence here to blow up to a hundred more schools around the country and develop an open-source platform in the next few years. This can be done not necessarily by building new schools but by converting traditional ones suffering from high test scores/low morale or low test scores/low morale.

2b) Develop and effectively integrate technology into the educational environment, e.g. creating an individualized, primarily group-oriented curriculum that is updating and improving all the time based on the student's input, his classmates' input, and the changing fabric of the internet; using cameras, microphones, voice-recognition software, and data science to analyze class conversations and expose students to new findings on the internet; allowing the student to look back at previous recorded class conversations and bookmarking what inspired or moved him; and connecting students in different locations through the use of advanced algorithms, allowing for spontaneous friendships to occur between people of all sizes, shapes, colors, philosophies, and locales, among other innovations.

3) Implement a financial plan that will allow socioeconomically disadvantaged students to attend, and continue scaling into the thousands. At the moment, my favorite idea is a Kickstarter-esque platform where people from anywhere in the US or Canada can invest in kids attending and receive a product or service for cheaper than, at, or higher-than market value. This is the end-goal of the school: To allow students to build their own internships, their own commencement into the "real" world. If this element of the project can be integrated into the curriculum sooner, it will be. The school will by now be registered as a lobbying entity on the Hill and in all states it's in, allowing students to take advantage of, and utilize, an unprecedentedly active political presence. This is how minors, along with the adult pillars of their educational community, can begin to shape national and international educational culture.

4) Tear down the industrial-educational complex, including taking on the four big test-taking companies: Pearson, McGraw-Hill, Houghton-Mifflin, and ETS, with the help of all other clout available. This will be done by making test-taking optional at the federal level. Schools will have to opt-in to tests instead of being forced to opt-out. This also includes the regulatory bottleneck that prevents alternative schools from being accredited, ultimately freeing up the US market to witness all kinds of alternative schools suited to niche interests and ways of learning.

There are three overarching phases to this project, which I describe in this order:

1) The "For Fuck's Sake, America" phase (FAFSA), as described above;

2) The "Overseas" phase, in which, in order for other countries to remain competitive with America's developing skillset, they either imitate the best alternative-school curricula or allow us to enter into their markets, and in so doing graduate authoritarian regimes to democratic ones (because there's no way to have everyone's experience matter in an authoritarian regime except to end said authoritarian regime) and unite people across and within borders;

3) The "New World Order" phase, in which the creativity, empowerment, and connection of the educated populations reaches a critical mass such that the people are able to spontaneously, within their connections, address conflict, intolerance, economic disparity, knowledge inequality, and hurt. This is also when all educational platforms will interlink as part of the oncoming Web 2.0, and the notion of distinct 'schools' will disappear. The old form of thinking will be rendered passe, and certain unmentionable crises will be minimized or averted.

This progress, given the movement of the technological revolution, can happen in 15 years or less from start to finish, given a lot of investment. Even students who are impacted by such an education for one year are irreversibly exposed to something that will change their direction forever. If the goal is to change the tide our society is moving in, the individual water molecules need to be pulled somewhere else by a substantial surge. I believe the right education is that surge we're looking for.
