# Rapid application development

_Captured: 2015-09-26 at 17:15 from [en.m.wikipedia.org](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development)_

Rapid application development is a response to processes developed in the 1970s and 1980s, such as the [Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structured_Systems_Analysis_and_Design_Method) and other [Waterfall models](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterfall_model). One of the problems with these methodologies is that they were based on a traditional engineering model used to design and build things like bridges and buildings. Software is an inherently different kind of artifact. Software can radically change the entire process used to solve a problem. As a result knowledge gained from the development process itself can feed back to the requirements and design of the solution.[[1]](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development) The waterfall solution to this was to try and rigidly define the requirements and the plan to implement them and have a process that discouraged changes to either. The new RAD approaches on the other hand recognized that software development was a knowledge intensive process and sought to develop flexible processes that could take advantage of knowledge gained over the life of the project and use that knowledge to reinvent the solution.

The first such RAD alternative was developed by Barry Boehm and was known as the spiral model. Boehm and other subsequent RAD approaches emphasized developing prototypes as well as or instead of rigorous design specifications. Prototypes had several advantages over traditional specifications:

  * Risk reduction. A prototype could test some of the most difficult potential parts of the system early on in the life-cycle. This can provide valuable information as to the feasibility of a design and can prevent the team from pursuing solutions that turn out to be too complex or time consuming to implement. This benefit of finding problems earlier in the life-cycle rather than later was a key benefit of the RAD approach. The earlier a problem can be found the cheaper it is to address.
  * Users are better at using and reacting than at creating specifications. In the waterfall model it was common for a user to sign off on a set of requirements but then when presented with an implemented system to suddenly realize that a given design lacked some critical features or was too complex. In general most users give much more useful feedback when they can experience a prototype of the running system rather than abstractly define what that system should be.
  * Prototypes can be usable and can evolve into the completed product. One approach used in some RAD methodologies was to build the system as a series of prototypes that evolve from minimal functionality to moderately useful to the final completed system. The advantage of this besides the two advantages above was that the users could get useful business functionality much earlier in the process.[[2]](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development)

Starting with the ideas of [Barry Boehm](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barry_Boehm) and others, [James Martin](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Martin_\(author\)) developed the rapid application development approach during the 1980s at [IBM](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM) and finally formalized it by publishing a book in 1991, _Rapid Application Development_. This has resulted in some confusion over the term RAD even among IT professionals. It is important to distinguish between RAD as a general alternative to the waterfall model and RAD as the specific methodology created by Martin. The Martin methodology was tailored toward knowledge intensive and UI intensive business systems.

These ideas were further developed and improved upon by RAD pioneers like James Kerr and Richard Hunter, who together wrote the seminal book on the subject, Inside RAD,[[3]](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development) which followed the journey of a RAD project manager as he drove and refined the RAD Methodology in real-time on an actual RAD project. These practitioners, and those like them, helped RAD gain popularity as an alternative to traditional systems project life cycle approaches.

The RAD approach also matured during the period of peak interest in [business re engineering](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_process_reengineering). The idea of business process reengineering was to radically rethink core business processes such as sales and customer support with the new capabilities of Information Technology in mind. RAD was often an essential part of larger business re engineering programs. The rapid prototyping approach of RAD was a key tool to help users and analysts "think out of the box" about innovative ways that technology might radically reinvent a core business process.[[4]](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development)[[5]](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rapid_application_development)
