# Editing a CV in markdown with pandoc

_Captured: 2015-11-08 at 18:42 from [blog.chmd.fr](http://blog.chmd.fr/editing-a-cv-in-markdown-with-pandoc.html)_

CV maintainance is one of these painful and repetitive tasks that you don't want to burn too much time on. For a while, I have been using latex with the excellent [moderncv class](http://www.ctan.org/pkg/moderncv), but the pdf format has annoying limitations:

  * Seeing a pdf document in a browser is not as nice as seeing an html webpage;
  * Human Resources usually prefer to work with word documents.

I thus decided to switch to the markdown syntax, and to generate various formats with pandoc. The code of my resume now looks like this:
    
    
    Cave Johnson
    ============
    
    ----
    
    >  Science isn't about WHY. It's about WHY NOT!
    
    ----
    
    Corporate Experience
    --------------------
    
    1940-1980
    :   *CEO of Aperture Science* (Upper Michigan, USA).
    
        Supervised the development of various gels, and of a Portable
        Quantum Tunneling Device.
    
    Hobbies
    -------
    
    Interests
    :   Refining moon rocks
    

The file can then be compiled in various formats. To obtain the html version:
    
    
    pandoc --standalone --from markdown --to html -o index.html index.md
    

But the default ouptut is rather ugly. That is why I wrote [a CSS](//resume.chmd.fr/style.css) to go with the html generated by pandoc. It is inspired by moderncv, and specially adapted for this use case. The command line becomes:
    
    
    pandoc --standalone -c style.css --from markdown --to html -o index.html index.md
    

Now that you are at it, you can also generate a word document or even some plain text file. No need to build a new one in a hurry!
    
    
    pandoc --from markdown --to docx -o index.docx index.md
    pandoc --standalone --smart --from markdown --to plain -o index.txt index.md
    

You can get a look at what it looks like on [my own resume](//resume.chmd.fr). The full code can be found on [git.chmd.fr](https://git.chmd.fr/?p=resume.git) (and [github](https://github.com/chmduquesne/resume)).
